Saṁyutta Nikāya 14.9 ||| Linked Discourses 14.9
1. Nānattavagga ||| 1. Diversity
Bāhiraphassanānattasutta ||| Diversity of Gains
Sāvatthiyaṁ viharati. ||| At Sāvatthī.
“Dhātunānattaṁ, bhikkhave, paṭicca uppajjati saññānānattaṁ, saññānānattaṁ paṭicca uppajjati saṅkappanānattaṁ, saṅkappanānattaṁ paṭicca uppajjati phassanānattaṁ, phassanānattaṁ paṭicca uppajjati vedanānānattaṁ, vedanānānattaṁ paṭicca uppajjati chandanānattaṁ, chandanānattaṁ paṭicca uppajjati pariḷāhanānattaṁ, pariḷāhanānattaṁ paṭicca uppajjati pariyesanānānattaṁ, pariyesanānānattaṁ paṭicca uppajjati lābhanānattaṁ. ||| “Mendicants, diversity of elements gives rise to diversity of perceptions. Diversity of perceptions gives rise to diversity of thoughts. Diversity of thoughts gives rise to diversity of contacts. Diversity of contacts gives rise to diversity of feelings. Diversity of feelings gives rise to diversity of desires. Diversity of desires gives rise to diversity of passions. Diversity of passions gives rise to diversity of searches. Diversity of searches gives rise to diversity of gains.
Katamañca, bhikkhave, dhātunānattaṁ? ||| And what is the diversity of elements?
Rūpadhātu …pe… dhammadhātu— ||| The sight element, the sound element, the smell element, the taste element, the touch element, and the idea element.
idaṁ vuccati, bhikkhave, dhātunānattaṁ. ||| This is called the diversity of elements.
Kathañca, bhikkhave, dhātunānattaṁ paṭicca uppajjati saññānānattaṁ, saññānānattaṁ paṭicca uppajjati …pe… lābhanānattaṁ? ||| And how does diversity of elements give rise to diversity of perceptions … diversity of searches give rise to diversity of gains?
Rūpadhātuṁ, bhikkhave, paṭicca uppajjati rūpasaññā, rūpasaññaṁ paṭicca uppajjati rūpasaṅkappo, rūpasaṅkappaṁ paṭicca uppajjati rūpasamphasso, rūpasamphassaṁ paṭicca uppajjati rūpasamphassajā vedanā, rūpasamphassajaṁ vedanaṁ paṭicca uppajjati rūpacchando, rūpacchandaṁ paṭicca uppajjati rūpapariḷāho, rūpapariḷāhaṁ paṭicca uppajjati rūpapariyesanā, rūpapariyesanaṁ paṭicca uppajjati rūpalābho …pe… ||| The sight element gives rise to the perception of sights. The perception of sights gives rise to thoughts about sights. Thoughts about sights give rise to sight contact. Sight contact gives rise to feeling born of sight contact. Feeling born of sight contact gives rise to the desire for sights. The desire for sights gives rise to the passion for sights. The passion for sights gives rise to searching for sights. Searching for sights gives rise to gaining sights …
dhammadhātuṁ paṭicca uppajjati dhammasaññā, dhammasaññaṁ paṭicca uppajjati dhammasaṅkappo, dhammasaṅkappaṁ paṭicca uppajjati dhammasamphasso, dhammasamphassaṁ paṭicca uppajjati dhammasamphassajā vedanā, dhammasamphassajaṁ vedanaṁ paṭicca uppajjati dhammacchando, dhammacchandaṁ paṭicca uppajjati dhammapariḷāho, dhammapariḷāhaṁ paṭicca uppajjati dhammapariyesanā, dhammapariyesanaṁ paṭicca uppajjati dhammalābho. ||| The idea element gives rise to the perception of ideas. The perception of ideas gives rise to thoughts about ideas. Thoughts about ideas give rise to idea contact. Idea contact gives rise to feeling born of idea contact. Feeling born of idea contact gives rise to the desire for ideas. The desire for ideas gives rise to the passion for ideas. The passion for ideas gives rise to searching for ideas. Searching for ideas gives rise to gaining ideas.
Evaṁ kho, bhikkhave, dhātunānattaṁ paṭicca uppajjati saññānānattaṁ, saññānānattaṁ paṭicca uppajjati …pe… pariyesanānānattaṁ, pariyesanānānattaṁ paṭicca uppajjati lābhanānattan”ti. ||| That’s how diversity of elements gives rise to diversity of perceptions … diversity of searches gives rise to diversity of gains.”
Navamaṁ.
